QUIC Readme File (#22405)
openssl/openssl: README-QUIC.md

> Using OpenSSL QUIC

Reviewer: Perhaps `Using OpenSSL with QUIC protocol` ?

==================

> From OpenSSL 3.2, OpenSSL features support for client-side QUIC.

Reviewer: `for QUIC protocol clients.` or `for QUIC clients.` ?

Users interested in using the new QUIC functionality are encouraged to look at
some of the following resources:

- The [openssl-quic(7) manpage], which provides a basic reference overview of

>   QUIC functionality and how use of QUIC differs from use of TLS with regard to

Reviewer: `... how creating QUIC connections differs from creating TLS connections with...`

Author: Not really sure about this one, it is a lot broader than just how connections are made.

Reviewer: OK

  our API;
- The new [OpenSSL Guide], which provides introductory guides
  on the use of TLS, QUIC, and other OpenSSL functionality. See the
  [ossl-guide-introduction(7) manpage] for the index.

> - The [DDD demos], which demonstrate the use of QUIC using simple examples.

Reviewer: `demonstrate creating QUIC connections using...`

  These can be [found in the source tree under `doc/designs/ddd`].
- The [demo found in `demos/http3`], which provides an HTTP/3 client example
  using the nghttp3 HTTP/3 library.

FAQ
---

### Why would I want to use QUIC, and what functionality does QUIC offer relative to TLS or DTLS?

QUIC is a state-of-the-art secure transport protocol carried over UDP. It can
serve many of the use cases of TLS as well as those of DTLS. QUIC delivers
a number of advantages:

- It supports multiple streams of communication, allowing application protocols
  built on QUIC to create arbitrarily many bytestreams for communication between
  a client and server. This allows an application protocol to avoid head-of-line
  blocking and allows an application to open additional logical streams without
  any round trip penalty, unlike opening an additional TCP connection.

- Since QUIC is the basis of HTTP/3, support for QUIC also enables applications
  to use HTTP/3 using a suitable third-party library.

> - Future implementations of OpenSSL QUIC will offer support for 0-RTT connection

Reviewer: Perhaps `... of QUIC in OpenSSL ...`

  initiation, allowing a connection to be initiated to a server and application
  data to be transmitted without any waiting time. This is similar to TLS 1.3's
  0-RTT functionality but also avoids the round trip needed to open a TCP
  socket; thus, it is similar to a combination of TLS 1.3 0-RTT and TCP Fast
  Open.

> - Future implementations of OpenSSL QUIC will offer support for connection

Reviewer: Same as above `QUIC in OpenSSL`. Otherwise it sounds like OpenSSL QUIC is something different from regular QUIC.

  migration, allowing connections to seamlessly survive IP address changes.

> - Future implementations of OpenSSL QUIC will offer support for the QUIC

Reviewer: Same as above

>   Datagram extension, allowing support for both TLS and DTLS-style use cases on

Reviewer: Is the uppercase `Datagram` right here?

Using OpenSSL with QUIC
=======================

From OpenSSL 3.2, OpenSSL features support for making QUIC connections as a
client.

Users interested in using the new QUIC functionality are encouraged to look at
some of the following resources:

> - The [openssl-quic(7) manpage], which provides a basic reference overview of

Reviewer 2: `s/manpage/manual page/g`  throughout the entire document.

  QUIC functionality and how use of QUIC differs from use of TLS with regard to
  our API;

> - The new [OpenSSL Guide], which provides introductory guides
>   on the use of TLS, QUIC, and other OpenSSL functionality. See the
>   [ossl-guide-introduction(7) manpage] for the index.
> - The [DDD demos], which demonstrate the use of QUIC using simple examples.
>   These can be [found in the source tree under `doc/designs/ddd`].
> - The [demo found in `demos/http3`], which provides an HTTP/3 client example
>   using the nghttp3 HTTP/3 library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The new [OpenSSL Guide][ossl-guide-introduction(7)], which provides introductory guides
  on the use of TLS, QUIC, and other OpenSSL functionality. See the
  [ossl-guide-introduction(7)] manpage for the index.
- The [Demo-Driven Design (DDD)][DDD] examples, which demonstrate the use of QUIC.
  These can be found in the source tree under [`doc/designs/ddd`].
- The demo found in [`demos/http3`], which provides an HTTP/3 client example
  using the nghttp3 HTTP/3 library.
```

  application can gain the benefit of QUIC without needing to wait for an OS
  update to be deployed. Future evolutions and enhancements to the QUIC protocol
  can be delivered as quickly as an application can be updated without
  dependency on an OS update cadence.

- Because QUIC is UDP-based, it is possible to multiplex a QUIC connection
  on the same UDP socket as some other UDP-based protocols, such as RTP.

For more background information on OpenSSL's QUIC implementation, see the
[openssl-quic(7) manpage].

### How can I use HTTP/3 with OpenSSL?

There are many HTTP/3 implementations in C available. The use of one such HTTP/3
library with OpenSSL QUIC is demonstrated via the [demo found in `demos/http3`].

### How can I use OpenSSL QUIC in my own application for a different protocol?

The [OpenSSL Guide] provides introductory examples for how to make use of
OpenSSL QUIC.

The [openssl-quic(7) manpage] and the [DDD demos] may also be helpful to
illustrate the changes needed if you are trying to adapt an existing
application.

### How can I test QUIC using `openssl s_client`?

There is basic support for single-stream QUIC using `openssl s_client`:

```shell

> $ openssl s_client -quic -alpn ossltest -connect=www.example.com:12345

Reviewer 3: Nit: no `=`, i.e.:

``` shell
$ openssl s_client -quic -alpn ossltest -connect www.example.com:12345
```

```

This connects to a QUIC server using the specified ALPN protocol name and opens
a single bidirectional stream. Data can be passed via stdin/stdout as usual.
This allows test usage of QUIC using simple TCP/TLS-like usage.

[openssl-quic(7) manpage]: https://www.openssl.org/docs/manmaster/man7/openssl-quic.html
[OpenSSL guide]: https://www.openssl.org/docs/manmaster/man7/ossl-guide-introduction.html

> [ossl-guide-introduction(7) manpage]: https://www.openssl.org/docs/manmaster/man7/ossl-guide-introduction.html

Reviewer 4: this link is a duplicate of the line above.

it should point to a manpage.

Reviewer 4: sorry, maybe this is intentional.

In the second bullet (line 13), there are two links to the same thing and that confused me.

Author: Yeah, it's intentional.

[DDD demos]: https://github.com/openssl/openssl/tree/master/doc/designs/ddd
[found in the source tree under `doc/designs/ddd`]: ./doc/designs/ddd/
[demo found in `demos/http3`]: ./demos/http3/

> [openssl-quic-background(7) manpage]: https://www.openssl.org/docs/manmaster/man7/openssl-quic-background.html

Reviewer 2: @jamuir this removes the duplicate `[OpenSSL guide]` entry.

a single bidirectional stream. Data can be passed via stdin/stdout as usual.
This allows test usage of QUIC using simple TCP/TLS-like usage.

> [openssl-quic(7) manual page]: https://www.openssl.org/docs/manmaster/man7/openssl-quic.html

Reviewer 2: We still slightly disagree on the question whether the "manual page" should be part of the link text or not. But that's a matter of taste, I guess.  🤷‍♂️

Reviewer 5: I would generally follow the principle that the noun phrase (with reasonable adjectives, and including definite article) is the best candidate for the link text. If for example I wanted to link to a product guide and it was obvious which one, I might have "see <a>the product guide</a>". 

So I would normally include "the", but since we have both "The openssl-quic(7) manual page" and "the openssl-quic(7) manual page", maybe this is the best way to do it
